Artikel The Cathedral and The Bazaar pertama di tulis pada tahun 1997. The Cathedral dan The Bazaar ini merupakan dua model berbeda.
- The Cathedral : memiliki model yang klasik
  1. lingkungan tertutup
  2. sekelompok kecil pemimpin / pengembang
  3. digunakan dalam proyek-proyek OSS. Contoh: GCC,GNU emacs
  
- the Bazaar : model yang diperkenalkan oleh Linus Torvalds
  1. lingkungan terbuka, hampir semua orang dapat berpartisipasi
  2. there are no clear leaders, udenfined number of developers
  3. however, there is a benevolent-dictator figure
  4. release early, release often. Contoh: Linux
  
  bagaimana Eric memperlakukan si pengguna:
- treat users as most important resource
1. turns them into the most important resource 
2. writing a piece of the final project
3. debugging
4. code improvement 

Eric's problem was that he needed a POP protocol client to work with and he found an abandoned one. the problem was the 
continuation of the abandoned client, and eric took it over and started to coordinate it.

Every good work of software starts by scratching a developers personal itch
  1. most successful free software projects have been started by developers with needs addressed by their "pet" project
  2. in the world of proprietary software, programmers spend their time building programs that they neither need nor want
  3. this motivaton could explain the highquality of result given by linux

Eric.S Raymond berhasil mencoba dengan prinsip-prinsip berikut:
  1. releasing early and often 
  2. adding to the beta list to everyone who contacted him about the implemented program
  3. announcing new releases to the beta list, stimulating people to participate
  4. listening to beta-testers, polling them about design decisions and taking in consideration patches and other feedback sent by them
Memang Eric memiliki banyak kendala tetapi dia berhasil dan gara-gara buku ini, Netscape merilis source codenya dan memasuki dunia open 
source. Meskipun belakangan proyeknya Mozilla kurang sukses karena banyak faktor. ESR menyusun buku ini dengan mengambil contoh uji coba dia dengan fetchmail. Fetchmail ini
dikembangkan dengan metode pengembangan yang dia sebut bazaar, dari pengamatannya terhadap Linus yang revolusioner itu.
  
